.TH GWP_DNS_CTX 3 "July 16, 2025" "GWPROXY DNS library" "Library Functions Manual"
.SH NAME
gwp_dns_ctx_init, gwp_dns_ctx_free \- DNS context management
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <gwproxy/dns.h>
.PP
.BI "enum {"
.br
.BI "    GWP_DNS_RESTYP_IPV4_ONLY    = 1,"
.br
.BI "    GWP_DNS_RESTYP_IPV6_ONLY    = 2,"
.br
.BI "    GWP_DNS_RESTYP_PREFER_IPV4  = 3,"
.br
.BI "    GWP_DNS_RESTYP_PREFER_IPV6  = 4,"
.br
.BI "};"
.PP
.BI "struct gwp_dns_cfg {"
.br
.BI "    int      cache_expiry;
.br
.BI "    uint32_t nr_workers;"
.br
.BI "    uint32_t restyp;"
.br
.BI "};"
.PP
.BI "int gwp_dns_ctx_init(struct gwp_dns_ctx **" ctx_p ", const struct gwp_dns_cfg *" cfg ");"
.PP
.BI "void gwp_dns_ctx_free(struct gwp_dns_ctx *" ctx ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions manage the lifecycle of a DNS context in the GWPROXY DNS library.
.SS gwp_dns_ctx_init
The
.B gwp_dns_ctx_init
function initializes a new DNS context based on the provided configuration
.IR cfg .
The context is stored in
.IR *ctx_p .
It must be freed with
.BR gwp_dns_ctx_free ()
when no longer needed.
.PP
The configuration structure
.B struct gwp_dns_cfg
defines the behavior of the DNS resolution system:
.RS 4
.TP
.B int cache_expiry
Cache entry expiry time in seconds. A value less than or equal to 0 disables caching.
.TP
.B uint32_t nr_workers
Number of worker threads to use for concurrent DNS resolutions.
.TP
.B uint32_t restyp
Resolution type preference, specified as one of the following enumeration values:
.RS 4
.TP
.B GWP_DNS_RESTYP_IPV4_ONLY
Resolve to IPv4 addresses only.
.TP
.B GWP_DNS_RESTYP_IPV6_ONLY
Resolve to IPv6 addresses only.
.TP
.B GWP_DNS_RESTYP_PREFER_IPV4
Prefer IPv4 addresses, but fall back to IPv6 if necessary.
.TP
.B GWP_DNS_RESTYP_PREFER_IPV6
Prefer IPv6 addresses, but fall back to IPv4 if necessary.
.RE
.RE
.PP
This function allocates necessary resources, including worker threads and cache structures if enabled.
.SS gwp_dns_ctx_free
The
.B gwp_dns_ctx_free
function releases the DNS context and all associated resources, including
worker threads, cache entries, and queued requests.
.PP
After calling this function, the context pointer
.I ctx
should not be used anymore.
.SH RETURN VALUES
.BR gwp_dns_ctx_init ()
returns 0 on success. On failure, it returns a negative error code:
.RS 4
.TP
.B -ENOMEM
Memory allocation failed.
.TP
.B -EINVAL
Invalid configuration parameters (e.g., invalid
.B restyp
).
.RE
.PP
.BR gwp_dns_ctx_free ()
does not return a value.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gwp_dns_queue (3),
.BR gwp_dns_entry_put (3),
.BR gwp_dns_cache_lookup (3)
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2025 Ammar Faizi <ammarfaizi2@gnuweeb.org>
.PP
This library is licensed under GPL-2.0-only.
